Add extended error reporting page to documentation (#2082)
JetBrains/intellij-sdk-docs: topics/basics/error_reporting.md

Plugin authors can integrate with that flow in two different ways:

- [`ErrorReportSubmitter`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/ErrorReportSubmitter.java) handles the user-facing reporting flow from the IDE Fatal Errors UI.
- [`ErrorReportSink`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/ErrorReportSink.kt) receives automatic background reports about unhandled exceptions and UI freezes attributed to the plugin.

These APIs complement each other.
`ErrorReportSubmitter` is the user-facing reporting API.
It is triggered when the user chooses to submit a report from the IDE UI, so the user is explicitly involved in the process.
It is typically used for issue tracker integration, custom backend submission, privacy notices, and account-aware reporting.
The submitter receives `IdeaLoggingEvent` instances together with the user comment, any included attachments,
and a callback used to complete the submission flow.

`ErrorReportSink` is the automatic background reporting API.
It is triggered when the platform automatically forwards a plugin-attributed exception or freeze, so no user action is required.

> It is typically used for telemetry, counters, deduplication, and best-effort backend forwarding.

Reviewer: I don't understand "best-effort backend forwarding". Maybe its worth rephrasing or clarifying.

Author: It basically means: sending reports to your backend when possible, without guaranteeing delivery

As I understood it, not all _your_ error can always be attributed to your plugin. So it's possible you won't get all. Also, there is a cap on the number of errors. I rephrased it.

The sink receives either [`UnhandledExceptionReport`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/ErrorReportSink.kt)
or [`UnhandledFreezeReport`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/ErrorReportSink.kt),

> which makes it suitable for observability scenarios even when the user never clicks a reporting action.

Reviewer: It sounds a bit like a silent error reporting without user consent.

We have descriptions of both APIs, but I think that it's worth adding a summary differentiator like "Use ErrorReportSubmitter to allow users to submit errors manually and use ErrorReportSink to xyz", where "xyz" is a clear use-case example. "Telemetry, counters, deduplication" are too generic, IMHO. What can we measure, count, or deduplicate?

Reviewer: OK, I reached the "## Choosing Between the APIs" section and I think it should be moved here.

Author: OK. I killed the sentence about "telemetry, counters, deduplication, and best-effort backend forwarding" in the beginning to not confuse people and left the detailed explanation in the end.

I really wanted to give a summary of both APIs at the beginning, which includes mentioning some terminology before it's explained properly.

> <video src="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F4ZQe3AU3v4" title="How We Built Comma, the Raku IDE, on the IntelliJ Platform"/>

Reviewer: The title is wrong.

Author: Yeah, of course it is. I wanted to try out if this is visible somewhere, copied something in and then forgot about it 😃

> ## The Easy Way: JetBrains Marketplace Exception Analyzer

Reviewer: I would reorganize sections a bit:
```markdown
## Manual Reporting

### JetBrains Marketplace Exception Analyzer
...

### Custom Implementation of `ErrorReportSubmitter`
...

## Automatic Reporting with `ErrorReportSink`
...
```

Reviewer: Also, please avoid "The Easy Way" in titles.

If the plugin is published on JetBrains Marketplace and the built-in reporting flow is sufficient, this is the simplest supported setup.

> Register the Marketplace submitter in <path>plugin.xml</path>:

Reviewer: "the Marketplace submitter" -> [`JetBrainsMarketplaceErrorReportSubmitter`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-impl/src/com/intellij/diagnostic/JetBrainsMarketplaceErrorReportSubmitter.kt)

> Register the Marketplace submitter in <path>plugin.xml</path>:

Reviewer: Please link the EP with:
```
<include from="snippets.topic" element-id="ep"><var name="ep" value="com.intellij.errorHandler"/></include>
```

</extensions>
```

The public contract is defined by [`ErrorReportSubmitter`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/ErrorReportSubmitter.java).
Reports are delivered as [`IdeaLoggingEvent`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/IdeaLoggingEvent.java) instances,
and the final result is reported back to the IDE using
[`SubmittedReportInfo`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/SubmittedReportInfo.java).

```kotlin
class MyErrorReportSubmitter : ErrorReportSubmitter() {
  override fun getReportActionText(): String = "Report to Vendor"

  override fun getPrivacyNoticeText(): String =
    "The report may contain stack traces, plugin version, IDE version, and attachments selected by the user."

  override fun submit(
    events: Array<IdeaLoggingEvent>,
    additionalInfo: String?,
    parentComponent: Component,
    consumer: Consumer<in SubmittedReportInfo>
  ): Boolean {
    // Start background work, then complete consumer later.
    return true
  }
}
```

Here, `getReportActionText()` defines the text shown on the report button in the reporting UI,

> `getPrivacyNoticeText()` must explain to users what data is sent and how it is used, and `submit()` performs the actual submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where:
- `getReportActionText()` defines the text shown on the report button in the reporting UI
- `getPrivacyNoticeText()` must explain to users what data is sent and how it is used
- `submit()` performs the actual submission
```

Copyright practises recommend using lists for enumerated information, instead of inlining all in sentenced. It's easier to scan and read.

> The `submit()` method receives the [`IdeaLoggingEvent`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/IdeaLoggingEvent.java) data selected for the report, the free-form text entered by the user in the comment box as `additionalInfo`, a `parentComponent` for any necessary interaction, and a `consumer` callback that must receive the final [`SubmittedReportInfo`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/SubmittedReportInfo.java). An `IdeaLoggingEvent` gives access to the core report data, such as the throwable, message text, and attachments included in the report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `submit()` method receives the [`IdeaLoggingEvent`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/IdeaLoggingEvent.java) data selected for the report:
- events - `IdeaLoggingEvent` instances give access to the core report data, such as the throwable, message text, and attachments included in the report
- `additionalInfo` - the free-form text entered by the user in the comment box as 
- `parentComponent` - for any necessary interaction
- `consumer` - callback that must receive the final [`SubmittedReportInfo`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/SubmittedReportInfo.java).
```

Also, `events` is an array - maybe it's worth mentioning where it may contain zero, 1 or more elements.

This is the main integration point for building a custom payload for an issue tracker or backend service.

> If `submit()` returns `true`, the submitter is declaring that submission has started and the callback will be completed later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `submit()` returns `true`, the submitter is declaring that the submission has started and the callback will be completed later.
```

The callback must eventually receive a `SubmittedReportInfo` stating if a `NEW_ISSUE` has been filed, the report was a

> `DUPLICATE`, or if the submission has `FAILED` altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The callback must eventually receive a `SubmittedReportInfo` with the proper `SubmissionStatus`:
- `NEW_ISSUE` - if the issue has been successfully filed
- `DUPLICATE` - if the issue is actually a duplicate of the existing one
- `FAILED` - if the submission failed
```

> If submission cannot even start, you must return `false` from `submit()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If submission cannot even start, `submit()` must return `false`.
```

> Do not leave the callback unfinished after returning `true`.
> The IDE uses that callback to update the reporting UI and final submission state.
>
{style="warning"}

## Threading and Coroutines

`ErrorReportSubmitter.submit()` is part of the error reporting UI flow.

> Like any code participating in UI handling, it should return quickly and avoid expensive blocking work on EDT.

Reviewer 2: I would summarize this to plain "It runs on EDT".

The general threading rules from [](threading_model.md) apply here as well.
That means, operations on EDT must be as fast as possible to avoid UI freezes, while
network, file, and other expensive operations belong on background threads.

> For plugins targeting 2024.1+, [Kotlin coroutines](kotlin_coroutines.md) are the recommended approach for asynchronous work.

Reviewer 2: Since when is this error reporting API available? If later than 2024.1, remove the "for plugins targeting 2024.1"

Author: ErrorReportSubmitter exists since around 2005 :)

To keep `submit()` lightweight, a typical implementation first extracts the information needed from the incoming events, then starts the expensive work in the background, returns `true`, and finally completes the callback when submission finishes.

When using coroutines, prefer a [service scope](launching_coroutines.md#launching-coroutine-from-service-scope) for submission work.
Use [`Dispatchers.IO`](coroutine_dispatchers.md) for network and file I/O.

```kotlin

> @Service

Reviewer 2: `@Service(PROJECT)`, as the default scope is APP, which might or might not be the best choice.

Reviewer: I think the application scope is correct here. Error reporting data, UI, etc. is shared between projects, so app-level.

class ReportingService(
  private val cs: CoroutineScope
) {
  fun submitReport(report: ReportData, consumer: Consumer<in SubmittedReportInfo>) {
    cs.launch {
      val result = withContext(Dispatchers.IO) {
        sendToBackend(report)
      }
      consumer.consume(result)
    }
  }
}
```

This pattern keeps the reporting UI responsive while still integrating cleanly with the IDE callback contract.

Also, do not perform long-running non-cancellable read actions while collecting data for a report.
Long-running read actions on background threads can block write actions and cause UI freezes.
If additional project or PSI data is needed for a report, keep access short and use the modern threading

> and coroutine APIs described in [](threading_model.md) and [](launching_coroutines.md).

Reviewer: I would link to the specific sections here.

> ## Attachments and Freeze Reports

Reviewer: As this section describes attachments for submitter and sink, I would move it after describing both approaches.

Author: done

> An exception report is often centered around a throwable and its stack trace.

Reviewer 2: `Throwable`?

However, you can provide additional context for such reports and log exceptions with attachments when useful:

```kotlin
try {
  // some code
}
catch (e: Throwable) {
  thisLogger().error("some code failed", e, Attachment("details.txt", "extra diagnostics"))
}
```

Those attachments may later appear in the reporting UI and become part of the report delivered to the plugin's submitter.

Freeze reports are different from ordinary exception reports because they describe a stalled UI and usually need more evidence to explain what the IDE was waiting for.
Therefore, when the platform records a plugin-attributed UI freeze, the report may contain one or more thread dumps and additional attachments collected during freeze reporting.

For `ErrorReportSubmitter`, those artifacts may appear as attachments in the `IdeaLoggingEvent`.
For `ErrorReportSink`, they are represented explicitly by `UnhandledFreezeReport.attachments` and `UnhandledFreezeReport.threadDumps`.

Freeze reports are often caused by lock contention, blocking I/O, or long-running work that prevents EDT from progressing.

> In these cases, a simple exception stack trace is not enough, and thread dumps plus freeze-specific attachments help answer what EDT was waiting for, which thread was holding the relevant lock, whether the plugin was doing background work that blocked a write action, and whether the stall was transient, repeated, or part of a larger problem.

Reviewer 2: Split the sentences into shorter ones?

Reviewer: Or use a list.

This is why freeze reports are usually much more diagnostically valuable than a plain stack trace.

## Automatic Reporting with `ErrorReportSink`

[`ErrorReportSink`](%gh-ic%/platform/platform-api/src/com/intellij/openapi/diagnostic/ErrorReportSink.kt) is an experimental API for automatic background reporting.

> Register it in <path>plugin.xml</path>:

Reviewer: Please link the sink EP with:
`<include from="snippets.topic" element-id="ep"><var name="ep" value="com.intellij.errorReportSink"/></include>`

```xml
<extensions defaultExtensionNs="com.intellij">

>   <errorReportSink implementation="my.plugin.MyErrorReportSink"/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <errorReportSink implementation="com.example.MyErrorReportSink"/>
```

</extensions>
```

Example:

```kotlin

> @Suppress("UnstableApiUsage")

Reviewer 2: Why UnstableApiUsage? Comment on this?

Reviewer: It is likely to silent warning in the editor, but we shouldn't do it in snippets and samples.

Author: It was because the API is experimental and this gives a warning. I removed the annotation in the sample code.

class MyErrorReportSink : ErrorReportSink {
  override suspend fun submit(report: UnhandledErrorReport) {
    when (report) {
      is UnhandledExceptionReport -> {
        // collect metrics or forward to backend
      }
      is UnhandledFreezeReport -> {
        // inspect duration, attachments, and thread dumps
      }
    }
  }
}
```

`ErrorReportSink` currently delivers two report types. `UnhandledExceptionReport` contains the exception class and stack trace.

> `UnhandledFreezeReport` contains a message, the freeze duration, attachments, and thread dumps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ErrorReportSink` currently delivers two report types:
- `UnhandledExceptionReport` contains the exception class and stack trace
- `UnhandledFreezeReport` contains a message, the freeze duration, attachments, and thread dumps
```

`ErrorReportSink` is intended for plugin observability, not guaranteed report delivery.

> Bundled IDE plugins are not notified about their errors, at most 10,000 exception reports per plugin per IDE session are forwarded,

Reviewer: Not sure if the information about bundled plugins is needed in SDK Docs.

Author: Agree, it's not important to 3rd-party developers.

> the platform does not deduplicate or debounce repeated exceptions, and exception reports contain less information than user-submitted reports.

Reviewer: Please split to shorter sentences.

The current platform implementation delivers sink reports asynchronously on a background dispatcher.

> Plugins should still keep sink processing short, deduplicate repeated failures, and rate-limit any backend traffic on their side.

Reviewer 2: any hints on dedups?

Author: I'd keep it like that. Going any deeper would be out of scope here, and simply searching the web for how to deduplicate stack traces gives lots of information. If people are really interested, we can do content around it later.

## Choosing Between the APIs

Use `ErrorReportSubmitter` when the user should explicitly submit the report, when the plugin needs the user comment,

> when a custom privacy notice or account-aware reporting is required, or when the backend expects a richer user-facing reporting flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `ErrorReportSubmitter` when:
- the user should explicitly submit the report
- the plugin needs the user comment
- a custom privacy notice or account-aware reporting is required
- the backend expects a richer user-facing reporting flow
```

Use `ErrorReportSink` when the plugin should observe failures even if the user does nothing, when the goal is telemetry,

> counting, alerting, or best-effort backend forwarding, or when automatic freeze visibility is important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `ErrorReportSink` when:
- the plugin should observe failures even if the user does nothing
- the goal is telemetry, counting, alerting, or best-effort backend forwarding
- automatic freeze visibility is important
```

Use both APIs when the plugin needs background observability during normal usage and also a richer user-driven reporting path for manual submission.

> ## See Also

Reviewer: I would change it to "Example Implementations".

And mention:
```markdown
- <link to IPE for submitter>
- <link to IPE for sink>
- [Error Report Submitter using Sentry backend](https://www.plugin-dev.com/intellij/general/error-reporting/)
```

> - This excellent [tutorial](https://www.plugin-dev.com/intellij/general/error-reporting/) offers a working solution for using _Sentry_

Reviewer 2: I would omit emotionally loaded terms in SDK docs.

Reviewer 2: Also, perhaps mention that this is a third party tutorial, not the official one

- [](ide_infrastructure.md)
- [](plugin_user_experience.md)
- [](threading_model.md)
- [](kotlin_coroutines.md)
- [](launching_coroutines.md)

> - [](coroutine_dispatchers.md)

Reviewer: These are linked in content where mentioned, so I wouldn't link it here again.
